# Lab Report: Into the Archives

#### ADRIANA MESSINA

## Process Description

For this week’s lab, or class got to explore some of Northeastern’s archival collections. The lab was held in the Snell basement, where many books were laid out from the school’s archives. The books ranged in size from easily portable in a pocket, to nearly two feet long. Amongst the line up were religious manuscripts, textbooks, and references books. We flipped through and studied the books, then discussed their connections to the readings we had done for class, specifically Mak’s Architectures of the Page. We reflected on how each codex was specifically made for its own intended use, and how its materiality reflected its inner print or text. The book I had looked most closely at was huge and filled with geographical information of London, complete with detailed maps and architectural sketches. I connected this to the Mak’s concepts in that even with a page so physically large, the font had to be small and printed in two columns per recto and verso just to get all the needed information to fit. That ratio was really interesting; the page was really not able to get much bigger without being ridiculous, and these constraints definitely affected how the print was set and how certain choices were made in the creation of this particular codex.Then we moved on to look at the archives collection of artists’ books, which were definitely my favorite piece of the lab. These were not so much books as they were art pieces, designed to be though-provoking presentations of stories, and the many ways they can be told. Some examples of the books are as follows: a pop-up book with accompanying music, a matchbook with words printed on the matches, a circle of a notebook spiral-bound on all sides, and a book of blank pages with holes cut in the middle. Some of my classmates would argue that not each book had a meaning, intention, or “story” per se but I personally liked them all and saw at least the ironic value they held. We then discussed these books much like we had discussed the others, talking about how their form and function were inseparably linked to their content and meaning. Each influenced the other in a seemingly inherent way, which made for a really interesting discussion and lab.

## Observations

Some of my favorite things about looking through these archival collections were the copperplate prints that appeared in one of the codices I looked at. These printed illustrations were clearly created somewhere separate from where the print was set down and inked onto the pages. They were their own inserts, carefully folded, always one-sided, and even on a different type of paper than the rest of the codex. These clues made it clear that the illustrations were engraved, processed, and printed elsewhere, then stuck into the codex after its words were set. Likely the author of the book commissioned an outside artist to create the illustrations while he focused on the text. It definitely brought me back to Fry’s The Machine that Made Us, with each item needed to use a printing press, from the paper to the fonts, requiring its own process and production line. In order for this massive book like the one from the archive to come together, the work and resources of so many people had to line up and come together perfectly. It is an impressive work of solidarity and careful planning for one mutual goal, which was really noteworthy to consider.As much as I loved the older codices of the archives, the most impactful part of the lab for me was definitely the artists’ books. There was something so fun about opening each book and not exactly knowing what to expect. Instead of black text on a white page, moving top to bottom and left to right, each book had its own structure inherent to its content. Some of them were funny or heartwarming, while others were really sad or thought provoking. We all had a lot of fun “trying out” each book, spending more time thinking about what each book’s form meant than actually reading it. As I remarked in class, I love dumb modern art and would love to be able to make some of my own art for the class, so I am really interested in creating an artist’s book myself for one of my unessays. Some concepts I have come up with so far is a book of every color I can make out of some random bottles of paint I have, embroidering curses and insults into a book with felt pages, or maybe even wearing some fun lipstick and “writing” a story by moving my mouth on the page while I speak. Whatever I end up doing, I think it will be a really fun and creative way to build a story, both within the content of my unessay and within its inherent materiality and form.

## Analysis

One reading that was pretty clearly connected to this week’s lab was Mak’s “Architectures of the Page”. In it, Mak says that, “intellectual rifts” (Mak 10) have been drawn between different types of text, so that the physical forms of each are being analyzed and understood differently. It is the non-verbal elements of a book that tell a reader how they should interact with a story, and this is what makes materiality of text such an interesting topic. He discusses the many forms books have come in, from papyrus scrolls with paginae, to wax tablets with erasable text, to codices with parchment or paper pages. Within each form is reflected the, “social history of thought,” (Mak 15) almost like a snapshot from that period of how information was valued and shared. These ideas definitely came into play when discussing some of the archive’s older books. The texts we looked at were symbols of their time, each reflecting a unique culture surrounding the time and place it was made. Each book’s constraints, affordances, and limitations were unique. This made each book’s content also inherently unique, unable to be separated from the form it was given. Each aspect influences and encourages the other, which is not how we typically understand a book. The page is taken for granted, when in reality it informs much of how we take in and view information.Gleick’s “Two Wordbooks” reflects more so the individuality and creativity of the artists’ books we saw during our lab. Gleick discusses a time before the standardization of English, when definitions, words, and knowledge in general were constantly “in flux” (Gleick 14). There was no standardization of language or spelling at any one time; the creation of Cawdrey’s first dictionary was an attempt to reign in the wildness of language and give it structure. Now, seemingly everything about the processes of writing and reading is standardized. There is one way to spell something, and if you spell it “wrong” you get the wiggly red line on a Word document or points off on a paper. Ripping a book apart or coloring all over its pages is the “wrong” way to read and will award you with only disapproving looks. This is where the idea of artists’ books becomes a really fascinating rebellion to this idea of standardization and correctness. Books don’t have to be one thing presented only one way; they can be whatever they need to be in order to get across the intended message of the author, if they even have one at all. It is as if we are returning to Cawdrey’s time, ripping apart the dictionary to create new definitions of what language can be.

I think this concept is what made the artists’ books so appealing to me – they are a type of rebellion against the standardization that has encroached onto the arts throughout history. There is no one way to create a story, and by allowing ourselves to be more creative, we can more richly and accurately share our stories with others. In our first class, we talked about how the codex itself is often ignored or taken for granted when it reveals so much information about the text itself, and this idea is definitely returning now on a more conceptual level. We take many of the standards of literature for granted, when in reality it is so much more interesting to play with our preconceived notions of what a book should be.