# Lab Report: Interactive Twine Narratives

#### ADRIANA MESSINA

## Process Description

For our last lab in this class, we used Twine software to create some interactive stories. Twine provides tools to create linking text blocks that send readers on a path determined by the creator of the story. To start of, we looked at an Twine interpretation of *Moby Dick*. As a reader, I was guided between many interconnected options, where I needed to read all the way through a few different options before I could move onto the next part of the text. This example showcased a lot of the things we can do with Twine, and got us ready to explore what we could do with the tool.

Using Allison Parrish’s Twine tutorial (and asking Prof. Cordell a lot of questions), I taught myself some Twine basics. To create a link we needed to put our text prompt and our next location in between double brackets, with a pipe in the middle. The text on left side of the pipe is the prompt that the reader sees, and the text on the right side of the pipe is the name of the next linked text block. This is where the audience is sent next afer interacting with the link. By creating links to existing text blocks, we could skip between blocks or not allow the audience to move on without looking at a certain text block first. These concepts could be combined in a bunch of different ways to create different reader paths.

Additionally, there are many variables that can be coded into Twine to control when a reader can move on to new text blocks; for example, a reader may need to type in an answer to a riddle or have a certain key to progress. Once we figured out the basics, we were pretty much set free to make our own stories.


## Observations

For my Twine story, I decided to make a breakfast-themed "choose your own adventure" style game. I wanted my reader to go through the process of making a perfect breakfast, which of course is peanut butter banana pancakes with whipped cream. The structure of Twine definitely prevented me getting my timelines and links confused, and the click-and-drag movement was intuitive and helped me organize my thoughts. My game ended up fairly simple and was only text-based, but it was still kind of tough to figure how to link texts together. Once I got the hang of the syntax, a lot of my story was just copy-pasting code from one block to another, and just changing the locations my readers would be sent to. Sometimes I would find some bug in my story that messed up my path, which could be frustrating. However, fixing the bug and getting things to run the way I wanted was a fun challenge. Once I got one thing working correctly, I wanted to keep going and make my story even bigger and more complicated.

Looking at the other Twine story examples was probably the most interesting part of the lab. I poked around a few different examplesand was amazed at how complicated some of the stories could get. There were story-driven side scrollers, text-based horror games, and kitschy personality quizzes in psychedelic colors. Each game had a new interesting mechanic that made me curious as to how it functions within Twine. I wanted to know how these people created such complicated links and code to create full-length games on a free and fairly simple online software. It seems like something I could spend hours working on just to make something small, so I can't imagine all the time these creators have put in to create some really masterful stories, games, and experiences.

## Analysis

This lab brought me back to a quote from Craig Mod's, “Future Reading”. Mod said, "Containers matter. They shape stories and the experience of stories." He believes that while we must be optimistic when facing new literature technology, we cannot pretend that every new technology is perfect. Everything has its affordances and limitations. Similarly, a container like Twine inherently and immediately changes the way that a creator can form their story and the way that readers absorb them. For example, each Twine story that I looked at had a very unique style and voice. A few examples had unsettling and hopeless tone of a psychological thriller. Others had the tone of an old sassy Sierra game that mocked you when you died. I noticed that my own game had a similar sassy tone; I think this may come from the power dynamic created by this type of container. The reader may not even know it, but they are being manipulated by the creator towards a certain end. They cannot skip ahead a page, look back a chapter, or "cheat" in any way if the creator doesn't allow it. This experience is unique to Twine as a tool and wouldn't function the same way in other containers.

Jon Bois, “What Football Will Look Like in the Future” also related closely to what we did during this lab. Bois' almost satirical, highly poignant reflection on a timeless Earth was both hilarious and upsetting. Like Twine, it required a certain amount of interaction from its readers to get its point across, be it by clicking Youtube videos or by scrolling up and down to track some trailing text.  A lot of the details from one chapter blended into the next, and old information often came back many chapters later. Its chaptered structure forced the audience to continue to each chapter in order, and its use of videos prevented speed reading by controlling the pace at which text appeared. Bois' unique style of interaction made me feel like I was a part of the story, following it closely to get every little detail. If I stopped paying attention to the additional media, maps, videos, and images, I would've lost track of the story and of Bois' overall message. Like Mod said, it wouldn't have been the same without the container it was in.

I think that this lab and these readings were a great way to close out this semester. It brought into conversation a lot of the concepts we have discussed during this class, going all the way back to the codex vs. Kindle debate from our first class. My on main point of interest throughout this class was how new technologies can affect the way we tell stories. Now at the end of this semester, I have gotten to learn about so many methods and techniques that I would've never considered before to make my stories more meaningful and complex. Twine showed the importance of connection and interaction at the small scale, which helped me remember the importance of those concepts at the large scale. Being a creator of literature, my goal is to forge connections and create something that others can interact with in some sort of meaningful way, even if that meaning is that the world is random and nothing has meaning. The opportunity to try so many new technologies and develop some skills in all of them has given me a world of new opportunities for storytelling that I can't wait to make use of in the future.