# Lab Report: MARKDOWN AND GITHUB

#### ADRIANA MESSINA

## Process Description

For this week’s lab report, we went through the step-by-step process of creating our Github accounts, familiarizing ourselves with the repository system, and practicing the basics of Markdown syntax. Following along with the class, I signed up for a student Github account and joined our Technologies of Text Fall 2019 classroom so that I could contribute to our shared repository. I got the Github application for my desktop and downloaded MacDown; I chose MacDown so that I could preview my final product while writing in Markdown syntax. I organized all the files on my computer so I could locate everything I needed for this lab and for the class in general. I then created a new Markdown file to begin practicing syntax. Using the Markdown references in the class site, specifically the [interactive Markdown tutorial] (https://www.markdowntutorial.com/), I got a hang of the syntax and played around with a test text, bolding and italicizing words, creating headings and blockquotes, and adding a beautiful picture of a slice of cheesecake. In the end I have a fairly decent showing of my newly- earned skills in Markdown, and was able to commit my test file on Github so I could share it with the class.


## My Observations

To be honest, I assumed this Markdown and Github lab would be a complicated, confusing endeavor. Much to my pleasant surprise however, it ended up being a much more intuitive and fun experience than I expected. As an international affairs student, I typically stay as far away from coding and HTML as possible. When we began the lab, I was little confused as to what plaintext writing was doing in an English class in the first place. At first glance, Github and Markdown looked pretty alien to me and both seemed unrelated to the other things we had talked about in class, specifically about what writing and codices actually are and what they do for us as people. It seemed to be a very impersonal way of creating text, and I really doubted how much I would like it. However, I ended up enjoying the process much more than I expected. It is never easy to start using a new technology, but the resources provided on the class site gave m a solid basis for understanding Markdown syntax, and I was able to get the hang of it fairly quickly. Markdown offered me a lot more control over my writing and using Github to see when and where I was making changes was undeniably helpful. I had to pay closer attention not just to what I was trying to say with my writing, but also to how I was formatting it while I wrote. It all became one smooth process, instead of multiple separated steps, which helped my ideas to flow much easier without thinking about how I wanted it all to look later on.After this lab, I definitely have a newfound appreciation for the all keyboard shortcuts and little buttons that writing software typically has to make creating my text easier. It gave me pause to have to write in plaintext and having to manually put in syntax to get my text to appear how I wanted it to. Normally it is such a fast and painless process that I don't even have to think about it. When using Markdown, however, I have to think about exactly when and how to change my text. If something doesn’t look the way I want, or if a link or image doesn’t work, I have to troubleshoot why that problem is occurring. This gets me more involved in the creation of my own writing, not just in what it says, but also how it will appear. Markdown is also especially helpful for me thanks to its file type flexibility. I always hate trying to turn a Word document into a PDF, just to have my formatting ruined, especially if that formatting is being counted towards a grade or has to fit within certain boundaries to be printed. Markdown makes it easy to avoid these issues, which ecnourages me to utilize it over the typical Word application. Overall, I can see now how beneficial plaintext writing through Markdown and Github can be when visualizing text and sharing it with others as it changes. While I’m unsure if I’ll ever be a Markdown “devotee”, I am certainly excited to keep using it throughout the class and to better my syntax skills.

## Analysis

When analyzing this lab, I was able to make a strong connection to Gitelman’s “Introduction: Media as Historical Subjects,” from _Always Already New: Media, History, and the Data of Culture_. I guess I never really thought about it before, but I have never pictured media evolving anywhere past where is now because I have never felt the need to. I took for granted that we are at, as Gitelman calls it, “the end of media history” (pg. 3), even though I know that definitely isn’t true. Programming my own words in plaintext brought me back to a time when complex text processing apps like Word didn’t yet exist or weren’t widely used. Though I didn’t really grasp the impact during the lab, when I went home and went back to using Word for another class, I was struck with how different the two media actually were. There truly have been leaps and bounds made even in the smallest parts of producing media; technology is now changing so quickly now that I know to claim we are at the peak of modern media is just naïve. Future generations will look back at our current media and be shocked that we actually had to actually move our fingers and click a button to underline our text instead of blinking at it, or whatever the new technology will be. Before I didn’t even think about past technologies that much, but now I have a much better understanding of Gitelman’s idea that “old media remain meaningful”. In overly simplified terms, we have to know where media has been to know where we can or will go next, and to be able to see the changes being made to how we perceive and absorb media.Through the process of this lab I was also able to make a close connection to Plato’s _Phaedrus_, and its overarching theme of not underestimating the past media we have used to communicate our ideas. Writing in plaintext, or even in HTML, was once our only option for formatting our text. In order to get your ideas across, you needed a deeper technical understanding of text and had to memorize syntax, which meant heaving to learn and develop new skills. This doesn’t mean that the old way is always better or more educational than the new, as Plato argues, but does mean that the new could not exist without the basis of the old. The limitations of plaintext programming are what inspired the creation of more complex text applications to overcome these issues. And this doesn’t just apply to text programming. I can hardly count the many times I have been told that I absolutely need to learn how to code by someone who couldn’t write an essay if their life depended on it. People just take modern skills for granted, but cannot “defend” their skills without understanding the history they are built upon. As Plato says, those who take new media for granted “will be hearers of many things and will have learned nothing…having the show of wisdom without the reality.” Perhaps that is a little harsh, but it reveals just how quickly we rush away from old media when it holds such an opportunity to show us new viewpoints and to teach us new skills.Something we talk about often in my co-op class is the need for a variety of skills and interests. A person who is well rounded is a far more appealing candidate than a person who is only up-to-date in the newest thing. While knowledge of cutting edge media and technologies is certainly sought after in many professions, it is just as crucial to understand the history of our technology. If someone has no background of knowledge for where that new technology came from, they can’t revert to other systems or apply solutions informed by the past if their modern technology breaks down. A more appealing candidate embodies the skill Plato describes as, “intelligent word...which can defend itself, and knows when to speak and when to be silent.” This means that they know where they stand in history and appreciate how far modern technology has come. I am glad to be taking a class where I can learn more about the history of the media we use, because it will make me more mindful of the past and give me a more well rounded skill set, which will hopefully help me in the future (or at least give me something really cool to put on my resume).