# Lab Report: Multisensory Reading
#### ADRIANA MESSINA

## Process Description

For this week's lab, we got to work with 3D prints of multisensory texts developed for the *Touch This Page* project. We began with a little briefing before the class to let us know how the activity would work. We were split up into groups of 3 and sent into the classroom, where each 3D print was placed under a font case stacked on some books. This way, we could reach our hand under the case to feel the prints, but couldn't see them. I appreciated Prof. Cordell finding a way to let us interact with these media without pretending we were blind. It kept the conversation focused on access to media instead of what it is like to be blind.

We went around the room in our groups to feel the 5 different prints and write down any observations we could make. We would take turns pressing our fingertips into the prints and try to make out what they might be, guessing their alphabet, structure, and format on the page. We would share our observations and write them down, though we were often unsure of what we were feeling. The prints were mostly in Boston Line Type, but one was in moon type. Some of the prints had drawings/illustrations that we could feel as well, but they were hard to identify. 

## Observations
What surprised me most about this lab was not how hard it was to feel out what the type was saying, but how hard it was to express what I felt. It was kind of funny being the one feeling the text, then trying to describe it in words to whoever was taking notes. I felt the only way I could really get my point across was for them to feel what I was feeling. I am not used to having to describe what I'm feeling because I typically can just show another person what I'm seeing, either in real life or through photos/videos. This challenge really put in perspective how we communicate about media as if everyone experiences it the same way, which is obviously not true.

This lab was really interesting to me because I got to experience the accessibility of media (and lack thereof) firsthand. People take for granted how much media is catered to those with unimpaired vision and hearing. Living with my dad, who is partially blind and nearly fully deaf, I hardly notice when we have subtitles on the TV. But for others, assistive technology like that sticks out like a sore thumb and makes it harder for them to understand a piece of media. We are so used to experiencing the world in one way, that any other way seems impossible. This can end up being exotifying, as able-bodied people praise people with disabilities just for adapting to a world that refuses to adapt to them. I think an activity like this opens people up to how others experience the world in a way that promotes mutual dialogue instead of pedestal-pushing or pity. 

## Analysis

This lab reminded me of one of the rules from Hendren's *All Technology is Assistive: Six Design Rules on Disability*, specifically rule #3 "Consider Fine Gradations of Qualitative Change". Hendren describes this rule as designers "address[ing] far subtler changes for bodies over a lifespan." Instead of assuming someone is either able-bodied or diasbled, Hendren suggests an in-between that our day-to-day lives must also include. By expanding our ideas of accessibility and shifting to "welcome multiple kinds of bodies", we can make the world more navigable for people with disabilities. At its time, Boston Line Type was one such expansion. No one even thought blind people could learn, but Samuel Howe wanted to expand the world to make it more navigable. During the lab, I definitely kept in mind how we have to continue what line type started. There is always a way that we can make room for people with disabilities, even in places we may not initially think of.

This lab also brought to mind some of the points discussed in *99% Invisible*'s "The Universal Page". Something that specifically caught my eye was their mention of the optophone. An optohpone is a "scanner that looks at text and then turns it into a series of tones representing the shapes of the letters", effectively turning words into a type of music. I think it's really interesting how transferable the experience of one sense is into another - in this case, sight into sound. It is something I could never imagine doing, but it is what I attempted to do on the small scale during this lab by transferring touch into sight. With practice, I inevitably would be able to make this transfer. It's really cool how adaptable the human body can be when we are greeted with a challenge - if we want to experience a medium, we will find a way to do it.

I can also connect this lab to my two Unessays. My first unessay is coincidentally a multisensory media thank to its form as a fabric book. The embroidered text has a raised texture, and the various bits of fabric and fluff I will add will offer even more to interact with your sense of touch. I even planned on spraying it with flowery perfume to make it a scent experience as well. This I think will help sell the irony of the book - not only are its words flowery and soft, the pages themself are soft to touch. For my second unessay, many of the pages I intend to include are also multisensory. Many of them, such as the folded or pop-up pages, involve your sense of touch. They require physical interaction or some other kind of action to get the meaning out of each page's chosen artist book structure. Similarly to the lab, your other senses have to get involved in order to get the full message of a medium.