# Reading Prep: Corpus

#### ADRIANA MESSINA

## Questions or Observations

1. This quote from Maria Munir in "What Gets Counted Counts" really resonated with me: "If you refuse to register non-binary people...you do not have the right to turn around and say that there are not enough of us to warrant change." This reminded me so much of an argument I hear a lot that queer people just started existing or that being queer is only "popular" now because of one reason or another (chemicals in the water, vaccines, etc.) In reality, queer people have been around forever, but were ignored, murdered, or forced to hide away. Similarly, non-binary people didn't just recently pop into existance, they just haven't been counted before, as Munir says.
2. Of the 4 visualizations of gender presented by the Non Binary Safe Space Tumblr, which do you think is the best? I personally prefer the multiple sliders, since I like their flexibility and rejection of gender as a stationary point.
3. The "Fugitive Verses" article describes newpaper poems as "perfectly suited for collection in scrapbooks." I thought this idea of "gleaning" was interesting because it reminded me a lot of Twitter and the idea of retweeting/reposting something. If you see something you like, you can take it out of its original source and paste it somewhere personal to you, like your own Twitter account. Then you can share it with other people the way that you want to - maybe editing or trimming part of it to your liking. I think it's interesting how this interaction has changed in terms of format (physical vs. digital), but hasn't really changed in terms of purpose (saving and sharing something you like).